Storylines, Level 1.
The Watchers by Jennifer Bassett.
1. The big caves.
Storylines, Level 2. The big caves.
Are we dead or alive?
It is not important.
We sit and we wait and we watch.
For 3,000 years.
We are the Watchers.
The guard is here too.
The guard to Poseidon.
The guard of the sea stands here in this fall.
We watch his statue.
It is gold.
All gold.
He stands here 5 meters tall.
His arms are gold.
His hair is gold.
His face is gold.
And his gold eyes shine.
His dark fall.
We are the Watchers.
Jim and Stella, his sister, are on holiday in Greece.
They are staying at a hotel in Iraqlion, on Crete.
They are talking to their friend, Nikos.
Nikos is a Cretean and lives near the Palace of Knosses.
What are we going to do tomorrow?
Can we go to Knosses?
Yes.
Why not?
It is a very famous place.
And very, very old.
About 3,000 or 4,000 years old.
Yes, I would like to.
Stella, look at this.
It is about Knosses.
It is very interesting.
Caves under Knosses.
Iraqlion, Crete.
Under the famous Palace of Knosses, there are many caves.
Some of these caves are very big.
There are many, many meters under the ground.
What is in these caves?
Nobody knows.
The caves are very dangerous.
Next week, Janis Padakis is going to...
We are going to find these caves, Stella.
Are you coming with us, Nikos?
But Jim?
Yes, yes.
I am coming with you.
You can stay with me at my mother's house near Knosses.
Good.
We are going to need a lot of things.
We are going to find the caves under Knosses.
Yes, but it is OK.
I can get everything.
Jim, the caves are dangerous.
Yes, but Nikos knows a lot about caves.
Yes, I do.
And I know the Palace of Knosses very well.
Don't forget, I won't there.
But do you know these caves under Knosses?
No, I don't.
But we are going to be careful.
Oh, all right.
When are we going?
Tomorrow.
Sometimes the Relights in these halls are music.
The people from the Palace come down here.
They are small, quick people with dark eyes and dark hair.
They bring lights and food and water.
And they dance the dance of the God.
They are the Gods people.
No, no, I forget.
They do not come now.
These halls are quiet, dark and quiet.
It is always night now.
There is no music, no dancing.
There are no people in the Palace now.
Not after the fire and the water from the sea.
They are dead, all dead.
And we, the Ketter and I, sit in the hall of the God.
We wait and we watch.
We are the Gods watches.
Two.
The first day.
At the Palace of Knosses.
It is seven o'clock in the morning.
Knickers is looking for the door to the caves.
Jim and Stella are waiting for him.
The sun is hot.
I'm thirsty. I'm going to drink some water.
Don't drink a lot. We need it in the caves.
Have we got everything?
I think so. The bags are very heavy.
Jim, Stella, the door is here.
Come on. We can go down now.
Be careful.
It's very dark.
I can't see anything.
Here. Hold this light.
We need all the lights now.
Walk slowly and be very careful.
Yes, I know.
How many caves are there?
This is the 10th cave now.
I can see another one in front of us.
A long one.
I'm tired.
I don't want to look at any more caves today.
How about some food? I'm hungry.
Yes. Let's eat something.
And we can stay here for the night.
Good. Where's the bag? The food is in there.
How old are these caves, Nikos?
I don't know.
3,000 years? 4,000 years?
Do many people come to these caves?
Not many people know.
Only the old Greek gods.
The god Poseidon lives in caves.
Some people say that God Poseidon.
There are no old gods in these caves.
How do you know, Jim?
The old Greek gods are only stories.
We read about them in books.
They're not important today.
Oh, yes, they are.
Don't laugh at them.
And Poseidon is a dangerous god.
All the books say that.
He's the god of the sea.
And the god of earthquakes too.
We have a lot of earthquakes in Greece.
Don't forget that.
Oh, Nikos.
That's silly.
The god of earthquakes.
Everybody knows the earthquakes.
No, Jim.
Nikos is right.
We don't understand everything.
And don't laugh at Poseidon.
Not here in these caves.
The years come and the years go.
3,000 years.
My sister, Aketa, and I sit and wait.
It is dark and cold in the hall of the god.
The sun never shines here.
Sometimes people come to these halls.
They are not the god's people.
They look for gold.
Only gold.
And Poseidon is angry.
It is the gold of his people.
And now it is the god's gold because his people are dead.
Nobody can take the god's gold or look at the gold face of the god and live.
But there are no lights.
No people now.
Only the god Poseidon stands here in this dark hall.
God of the blue sea.
God of the green sea.
God of this dark hall.
We are his watchers.
3, the second day.
Wake up, Stella.
Good morning, Nickos.
Morning.
It is always night in these caves.
What is the time?
7 o'clock.
Are we going on or back?
What do you think, Nickos?
I don't know.
How many caves are there?
15, 20?
I don't know.
But we can look at the next one.
Or two.
Or three, or four, or five.
I know you, Jim.
You want to see everything.
This is the 14th cave.
And this cave is big.
Very big.
Look.
This is a road.
We're walking on a road.
Yes.
You're right.
It's a very old road too.
Look at these stones on the floor.
Thousands of years old.
But whose road is it?
And where does it go to?
I don't know.
But we can follow it.
But it's six o'clock now.
I think...
Listen.
I can hear water.
Can you hear it?
There's a river in front of us.
We can't get across a river.
Oh, yes, we can.
I don't want to go across.
It's dangerous.
No, it isn't.
Come on, Stella.
Stella's right.
Rivers under the ground are dangerous.
Listen.
I can hear something.
It's only the river, Stella.
It's all right.
We can go across the river.
And then we can stop and stay there for the night.
Yes.
We can make a fire and have some food.
Listen, Sister.
Do you hear anything?
There are people at the river.
They are talking and laughing.
Listen, Sister.
They are coming here to the hall of the God.
Why?
Who are they?
What do they want?
Gold.
They want gold.
All people want gold.
They cannot eat it.
They cannot drink it.
But the love of gold is in all men and women too.
But they cannot take the God's gold.
We are His watchers.
We call the God and we say His name.
Then the God wakes and His speaks.
Gold.
The third day.
When are we going to go back?
This is the third day now.
I don't like these caves.
Why not, Stella?
I don't know.
I can hear something.
Or someone.
It's not the river.
I want to go back, Nikos.
Yes.
Sometimes I can hear something too.
But there's nobody in these caves, Stella.
Only us.
Let's look at one more cave.
Then we can go back.
Okay?
What's Jim doing?
I don't know.
He's looking at something.
Jim, what are you...
Hey, look at this.
It's a bowl.
A gold bowl.
It's beautiful.
Can I hold it for a minute?
It's very heavy too.
Look at all this gold.
Is it old, Nikos?
Yes.
Thousands of years old, I think.
We can sell it.
We can get a lot of money for this bowl.
We can't do that.
It's not ours.
Who's is it, then?
It's, well, it's...
I don't know.
But it's not ours.
Don't take it, Jim.
Leave it here.
No.
I'm going to take it.
It's ours now.
Can you hear them, sister?
They are near the hall now.
Listen.
They are looking for gold.
Gold.
All people want gold.
Look at that next cave.
Can you see it?
It's huge.
It's not a cave.
It's a...
A hole.
A huge hole.
Jim, Nikos, don't go in there.
Why not, Stella?
I think someone is watching us.
I don't like it.
Why don't we go back, please?
Who is watching us?
We're the only people here.
I don't know.
But someone or something is watching us.
And it doesn't like us.
Don't be silly, Stella.
Nothing is watching us.
Come on.
I can see them now, sister.
Two men and a woman.
They are young.
Two of them have blue eyes.
They are not people from the palace.
They are not the gods, people.
And they cannot come in here.
They cannot take the gods gold.
They cannot look at the face of the god.
Look at those statues there.
They're very, very old.
I don't like them.
Look at their eyes.
Come away, Stella.
I can see something at the end of the whole.
Look.
What is it?
It's tall.
Very tall.
It's a statue, a huge statue.
And it's shining.
It's gold.
Oh, gold.
Don't look at it.
Don't go in there.
Please, Jim.
Please.
It's dangerous.
Stop him, Nick.
Stop him.
They are looking into the whole now.
Call the god.
Now, sister.
Now.
Say the name of the god.
They cannot come in.
Be quiet for a minute.
Wait, Jim.
Listen.
Why?
What's...
I think Stella's right.
There's something...
Listen.
Because...
What's that?
Can you hear it?
Oh, no.
No.
The ground is moving.
It's an earthquake.
There's going to be an earthquake.
The stones are falling.
Run.
Back to the river.
Quick, Stella.
Run.
We can't.
The walls are falling.
Everything is falling.
We can't get out.
Creek News.
14th of August.
Earthquake at Knosses.
Three young people are dead.
Erachlion Creek.
Anna Stavros, mother of Nicos Stavros, says.
Nicos and his two English friends, Jim and Stella,
are in the case of the city.
But where is the door to the caves?
Nobody can find it now after the earthquake.
My son and his friends cannot get out.
They are dead.
The God Poseidon, God of the Sea, is angry.
He speaks and the ground moves and the stones fall.
But the God can sleep again now, assistant.
The men and the woman are quiet.
They cannot move.
They lie under the stones.
They hold the God's gold bowl in their hands.
But they cannot go back across the river.
And they cannot look at the face of the God.
The God's gold bowl in their hands.
At the face of the God.
The God's gold are his shine in this dark hole.
We are those watches.
Published in Copyright Oxford University Press, 1996.